order as we resume the application for
Veil soccer property at Long Hill Road
Riverside Drive the applicant seeking
special permit for lighting at the
soccer
fields now I I see there's one person
listed in the virtual audience that I
don't know labl
okay she's not hi I'm just here to
observe thanks for having me okay very
good thank you um
so is there anybody here from B soccer
club to discuss the
application yes here so I can speak to
that uh veale soccer club has made a
decision that will they will no longer
use Handover Fields so they have packed
up and moved to Cotton
so this
application uh from my perspective they
have no intention of submitting a
completed application so I would guess
you could close public hearing and uh
deny the application and move on okay
thank you Eric
um Jim do you have any I'm not think I'm
not thinking there's going to be a lot
of discussion here but I'll give the
commission members the opportunity to uh
to provide comment if they if they
want I have had no communication from
any inqu should
be very good hearing uh hearing no
comments or questions or any discussion
on the application other than what Eric
just provided uh I will close the public
hearing and that's at time
7:02 and I will call the regular
Planning and Zoning meeting to order at
time
702 roll call and seaing of
alets I see we've got an
CR
Scott Patrick see Le you're here with
us I don't show you as muted lean um
what just just making sure you're you're
electronically connected to us and
you're
here
okay and myself so all five regular
members are here I see Susan England and
Amory
dagel uh I do not see Kevin with us
tonight so Kevin's absence uh Susan and
Amory our president's alternat and no
alternat will be
seated item three is additions or
changes to the
agenda and
uh I've got one addition I was just
going to included under discussion but
we've got a couple of other things
labeled there so I would like to add
item 10 C under discussion is a
discussion on signs
any other
additions to the
agenda um if I might uh Mr
Sher
yes um can you hear me I can yeah okay
so um I my understanding is that the
town is bringing on a new zoning
enforcement
officer um if if he is going to start
before the
next uh Planning and Zoning meeting it
it might be appropriate to go ahead and
formally appoint him as a as a zoning
enforcement officer so he can hit the
ground
running um but good point John and uh
what I I meant to do of course I didn't
write it down in my note so I don't have
it here is to introduce the new zoning
enforcement officer to be that's Wayne
cassic our side of family pronounce is
kachuk kasic okay and and he is here
tonight now so so he will be taking over
for Jim at some point in the future that
will not be between now and the
next um Planning and Zoning meeting you
know we
uh I will give uh Wayne the floor in
just a minute to sort of introduce
himself to everybody but uh he does not
have a lot of zoning planning and zoning
experience at this point and so we're
going to have a little bit longer
turnover than we might normally have so
I'm aware of the fact that we have to
appoint him at some point but uh that
that won't be tonight and and I do
expect uh you know somewhat on the order
of if Wayne had his way and I had my way
it would be like four
months before he takes the Rings he's
got a little bit to learn so um with
that
Wayne you want to say anything to
uh can they all see and hear me from
here or should they move or um it's
easier if you're sitting at the table
but y you should be visible in the
audience yeah once once he starts
talking the camera should find him okay
well hi uh my name is Wayne kachik uh
I've been living here in Andover for
about 12 years now um prior to that I
used to work on one of the dairy farms
here in town on
Road
um I'm just happy to uh have uh gotten
this uh this job I haven't been
appointed yet but I I fully expect to be
able to meet the expectations of the
board and uh the Town
Administrator
uh as been said I I don't have any
specific experience in zoning my
background is with the connetic at
Department of Agriculture as a
regulator so I'm hoping to I'm hoping
that that experience and training bodes
well for for this
position okay thank you Wayne yes
um back to item three additions or
changes to the agenda I'll make a motion
to add item 10
Charlie signs under
discussion and uh and that would be the
only change for tonight looking for a
second to the motion no second thank you
an any
discussion heing none I'll call for a
vote an i Scott hi Patrick I
Leanne oh yes I'm here
um I thank you and I vote I as well the
motion passes 500
next item up is public comment uh on any
items other than the agenda anybody from
the public want to
uh speak at this
time and I see Joanne herbs here you
have any comments for us Joanne no I'm
off set I just want to listen to the
meeting thank you so much okay
and then
uh bata bata M Bata I don't have your
first name here but first name oh that
is your first name okay very good Bata
do you have any comments for us tonight
no thank you Jed
okay um then we'll move on to Old
business first up is uh action on the
application of ve
soccer and uh again and I think I will
make this a part of the standard routine
just so I don't I can't be accused of
influencing the vote in a negative
Direction but we always vote uh our
votes uh full the positive so if uh if
you're not going to vote in favor of the
motion then don't vote in favor of the
motion I'll make a motion to approve the
application of Bale soccer for the uh
lighting at the soccer fields
a second Scott seconds any
discussion hearing then I'll
call yeah go ahead
Leanne um yeah I must have been signing
in right at 7:00 I missed what you must
have immediately convened the public
hearing and then I was on the call when
you closed it but what was the reason
for
the basically no discuss
then the reason for the no discussion
was the veale soccer club is uh chosen
to move over to Vernon where I guess
they have
lights cry and so there's nobody here to
discuss the motion no further action was
taken since the last
meeting okay thank
you so I we'll call for a vote to
approve the application for
the lights at the soccer field Dan no
Scott no Patrick no
Leanne no and I vote no as well motion
fails 0
five next item up uh is yours John the
plan of conservation and
development okay um thank you Jed uh so
I am going to go ahead and share my
screen
um going to do a short hopefully
relatively short presentation
um let's
see let me move this over so I can see
it
um all right does this look uh more or
less like a PowerPoint presentation on
the
screen yeah okay uh here I'm going to
start it um you go to full screen it
might be bigger so we can read it a
little better yeah let's see swap um all
right how about
this that's better that's better okay so
um so what we're talking about today is
um the first of the um six substantive
chapters uh or substantive sections from
the planet conservation and development
as we have outlined it um you'll recall
that in our vision state
um we had six we envision statements
that covered a variety of topics
including Housing and Community
Resources and natural
environment conservation and this one um
included um this this this uh Town's
Road Network and it included the
statement we envision a safe and vibrant
Andover that connects the community
through a network of complete streets
and enhances the the town's Civic campus
on both sides of Route Six at its heart
um so this is sort of again one of our
the the topic sentence essentially of
one of our six um topics for discussion
I'm going to go through a little bit um
discussion about what complete streets
is and why we're kind of using this as
the framing device um of the the topic
and then we'll um have a little bit of
discussion on on sort of key areas of
focus so first what our complete streets
and I'll not read the whole thing but
again it's it as it sounds it's complete
it's meant for all users of streets in a
safe way all ages and abilities um
drivers pedestrians bicyclists or public
transportation Riders and the idea is
from the beginning uh from the the
conception and planning of streets to
the actual construction and operation of
roadways make sure that all users are
considered and their safety and
efficiency is um at its heart so it's
it's an approach to planning
constructing um and operating um
transportation
networks um why are we doing this and I
and I will um pause quickly by and by
way of thanking um Eric uh Anderson for
all of his work and advocacy on on
complete streets not only in and over
over the last many years but also um
regionally and a lot of this information
comes from uh various presentations that
that Eric has assembled over the last
couple years um
so uh why focusing on complete streets
is because our our streets are not
fantastically safe um not only an
endover but but you know Statewide
Network wide um the top graph is um uh
fatalities um over the last um 10 years
and this I believe is
Nationwide um and and so you see after
covid in in 2020 uh traffic fatalities
have have dramatically
increased um and there had and the
bottom chart shows you again um the the
the jump uh in in pedestrian accidents
uh pedestrians fatalities um bicycle
fatalities and cars and you can see the
purple and the green um your your less
traditional users of our street networks
pedestrians and bicycles are
tremendously more at risk than vehicles
and they had um huge huge increases
again since uh 2020 or so it's it's
never been great but since 2020 those
those numbers have jumped
significantly um in particular in
Andover we have been focusing on
complete streets um since the
1978 plan of conservation and
development and that established a clear
goal of making and over more walkable
and bike friendly but not a lot of
progress has been made over the last 45
years or so um the Planning Commission
recognized um about 10 years ago that
the PCD did not properly ad um address
complete streets and so in
2016 um the the first um and over
complete streets program was adopted uh
with a goal being Safe Streets or
complete streets and making the road
Network um making the road Network work
for everyone um and so again the
complete streets is the concept the
approach is the Safe Streets system or
Safe Systems approach and you can see
the the the graph there that um you know
death and serious injuries are
unacceptable humans do make mistakes
humans are vulnerable responsibility is
shared safety is proactive and
redundancy is crucial um and so it's
it's kind of a holistic approach to
looking at our transportation networks
and how can we do this in a way that
that makes everyone safer without
sacrificing
efficiency
um the traditional approach is to
certain extent kind of a a shrug or
looking at kind of best case well people
just need to do the right thing in all
circumstances people you know need to
perfect their behavior um looking at
preventing collisions and and focusing
on individual the the driver or the
operator responsibility and basically
saying well you know stuff's going to
happen traffic deaths are inevitable
however a vision zero through a Safe
Systems approach it recognizes that
people will make mistakes that drivers
are going to make errors um and so the
the idea is to anticipate these mistakes
by designing better systems um better
road infrastructure vehicles to make
those mistakes the risks and the
implications less severe so that when a
mistake does happen a crash does happen
um the safe system that we put in place
reduces the impact so it's slower speeds
it's it's different um approaches on on
uh collisions or or
intersections um and this is something
that again if you bake this into the
whole system it doesn't necessarily have
to be expensive because you're planning
this from the beginning so it's again
it's a it's a different way of
approaching um the street
Network so our complete streets goal
again starting with with the the overall
goal of A Safe Systems approach um is we
need to change the municipal policies
that in a way that includes the needs
not just people on in vehicles um but
also I should say motor vehicles uh
people on foot people on bicycle people
in buses or or other forms of um trans
Transit making sure that this works for
people of all ages and abilities so that
there are more options than just getting
into a car um that you can get to to
school to work to shop to recreate um in
in multiple modes in a way that is safe
um and to then use this complete streets
approach to increase the quality of life
for andov Resident so people don't feel
stuck particularly if they don't have
ready access to um a personal vehicle um
so that they can feel like they can walk
safely they can ride a bicycle safely
there are Transit options and then to
make sure that the public works
department as they are the ones that are
going to be primarily responsible for
enacting this stuff make sure that the
public works department has the
appropriate guidance um that they can
make the improvements in the way that
will um
improve the
system so again with thanks to Eric
basically since the 2016 First Complete
streets plan um there have been a number
of success stories completed projects um
including uh and again I'm not going to
read all of these um several bicycle and
pedestrian Crossings um across Route Six
particularly you know to get from the
north side to the South Side uh Long
Hill or vice versa the the north side at
Long Hill um
accessibility improvements at the
library access to the rail trail The Hop
River um a variety of pedestrian and
bike safety signs and and Road
treatments um around the
lake working on connecting Town assets
again the the uh recreational Fields the
library churches Town Hall the schools
um bike racks at at at public
locations uh way finding
signs and then uh then again again more
recent recently the the ebikes um at the
community center which um Jed and I were
were fortunate enough to take out a
couple of weeks ago and hopefully others
have have gotten a chance to try those
um so those are all success stories
there are more um and and a lot of this
is in again in process um we have a a
nearly $300,000 connectivity Grant um
signalization upgrades um a a study um
for the root 316 connection and that
that plan has basically been
complete um the more recent Grant
following up that connectivity plan is a
three three million lsip Grant to
actually build out the multi-use pathway
and that should be happening over the
next couple of years um a more recent
Grant from the de to design the
improvements of the Percy cook Trail
which is again another way to get from
kind of the Civic campus Town Hall area
out to the hop River
Trail um and then some of the policy
changes incorporating straight safe uh
complete streets into the road network
uh design decisions changing zoning
regulations that includes bicycle
parking and pedestrian access rail trail
Crossing uh as well as um speed signs
and and other Trail improvements so a
number of things have happened already
and so the town I think largely under
under um Eric's Eric's leadership and
Direction uh as well as public works and
planning and zoning has has really moved
forward on a lot of the the complete
streets um goals and connectivity um
Mission but there are still a number of
things um that need to be addressed and
these are some of the things that that
um ideally will be put into um the plan
of conservation and development I'm
going to put this on the screen and
we're going to come back to it in a
little bit um again that while while the
um the crossing around Long Hill um has
been added to Route Six there are
several other Crossings of Route Six um
that are going to be uh important in
order to knit the town more closely
together in the future um again the safe
access installing the safe access to
town resources particularly again the W
Fields Town Hall the Community Center
Schools um Library Etc um safe access
from a number of places on the rail
trail um you know both both on the North
and the South side of Route
Six as well as those those smaller
connections using Roots using the Hop
River Trail to connect to town
businesses and we're looking at
particularly
places like the Shell station and the
Andover Plaza
um looking at other safety improvements
in the Lake District which is of course
the most highly uh High highly um
populated highest density area and the
area with um the largest you know
population of of uh current and P
potential
pedestrians um as well as adding
connections such as secure bike racks
public transportation uh wayf finding
and then looking at addressing issues of
speeding running stop signs and and
visibility issues but this is sort of a
a short list but it's you know it
addresses some of the things that are
kind of shortcomings in our complete
streets system right now let me
interrupt you for just a minute John and
uh the the previous slide had a picture
of the state trooper down there
somewhere probably on Lake Road you know
and it was funny because a couple years
back you know when we started asking
questions about what are the problems in
the town everybody was talking about
speeding especially around the lake and
then you know so our state trooper goes
out there and and watches and gives out
a couple of tickets and everybody's in
an uproar because you're not supposed to
be arresting us you're supposed to be
arresting those other folks that are
driving around the lake fast yeah I
thought that was kind of
humorous the other thing well two other
points before we get too far uh you know
can has made the news
recently with 2023 had a record number
of traffic
fatalities and 2024 is on track to beat
that so that shows the importance of us
approaching the vision zero that Eric
had put in there and then lastly the
last comment I want to make is as we go
through the
PD you know he's got a list of issues
you've got a list of issues to address
here and is that helpful when it comes
time for us to uh make that 824 referral
that our plan of conservation and
development supports something that we
want to go off and do if it's
specifically listed it's
uh very easy if it's not specifically
listed or not in the pocd at all it
makes it tough to go out and fill those
uh 824 referrals that we have to do uh
when we're going to you know make
substantial improvements in the town
spend down money that sort of thing so
having had to go through and try to
justify a couple of the things I was not
on as firm a ground as we might have
been like Eric's got these issues
spelled out we need to make sure if
something's important it's in the plan
of conservation development so when we
go off and do it we can uh we can say
that yep we looked at it this is what we
want to do and that sort of thing so
enough of my Interruption go ahead John
okay no well that's that actually cues
us up nicely Jed um to the next steps
and actions which again could could take
the form of essentially that that list
of recommendations those list of
improvements that could filter nicely
into grant applications or 824 referrals
if we're making improvements on
Municipal assets um so again so
we put this in a couple of broad
categories um would be traffic calming
and lower speed roads because again if
you're taking a complete streets and a
and a safe systems approach part of the
part of the way to reduce fatalities
reduce severity of of accents and
mistakes accidents and mistakes is again
to reduce speeds um and so you know in
in in so far as we don't control the
speeds on Route Six or on Route 316 or
other town roads um
work obviously work with the state on on
calming those those speeds down lowering
speed limits traffic calming um
sometimes with uh physical changes to
the road and those things could include
I will say could include um things like
speed humps or speed tables uh
roundabouts sherrow which again are
those markings on the streets where you
see sort of Arrow like a double arrow
and then a bicycle um icon that
indicates that the road the full width
of the road is meant to be shared
between um bicycles and and um Motor
Vehicles as well as Road striping um and
Eric uh had had discussed with us a
while ago and I don't know if this was
at the at a public meeting or a private
meeting that we had or a you know a a a
um staff meeting that very often Center
striping um
encourages higher speeds um because the
the the path of the the the travel path
is a little bit better delineated and
people feel more comfortable to drive
more F more quickly but Edge striping
which is essentially you have no Center
stripe but you just stripe the edges of
the road and so the center portion of
the road is essentially a two-way shared
it it not forces but it encourages
people to slow down because there is no
um you feel a little bit less certain
which part of the road you're on or that
you're giving oncoming traffic enough
enough um with birth
um and it so it tends to reduce speeds
and so that could be a a different
approach in the way that the town
delineates its roads so again these are
these are potential next
steps uh a couple of other categories
again multi-use path and Trail
connections again recognizing sort of
over and over in a lot of our
discussions that the Hop River Trail is
a really critical spine not only for
transportation and Recreation but also
in many ways Economic Development and
and sort of fostering the the sense of
place and community and and over
and so looking at those connections
again route 316 uh between Town campus
and the Hop River Trail that is in
progress um but it's possible that we're
going to need more more support and more
financing for that um looking at at
connecting the Andover Plaza which is
one of the major potential commercial
drivers in town connecting that to the
rail trail um far going farther down
Route Six from hendy Road hendy road is
going to become important particularly
as the as the bridge on Long uh Long
Hill is going to be um under
construction uh then getting from the
the gas and convenience stores again
looking at some of the the commercial
connectivity um as well as the the
potential development at Route 87 in
lyol corner um and then looking at um
sidewalks uh whether it's on on Long
Hill Road to the Recreation Complex
would connect the the the Town campus um
and then well out at um hendy Road as
well and then again some of the physical
improvements to town roads that that we
discussed on the previous slide that
would include traffic calming such as
edgeline striping Sher but then also
trail head parking areas so people can
drive put you know leave their vehicles
get on bikes and or start
walking uh more bike racks and Senior
Transportation uh as well as electric
vehicle charging uh opportunities
particularly as we try to as we see more
and more electric vehicle traffic on the
Hop River Trail and in town in general
so there's a number of specific actions
and specific locations um we can focus
on so that's that's in again in Broad
Strokes um that's the idea um again
focusing on our transportation systems
improvements and our connectivity in and
over as a holistic thing taking a
complete streets and and um Street
safety approach or safety Safe Systems
approach um and then and then you know
filtering it down what are the ways that
we can improve our systems and our
streets to make things um more efficient
and particularly um safer for the
community um so with that I will stop
with the presentation part and and open
it up if um people had thoughts um about
about key areas or elements um of our
town you know from a transportation
standpoint that we should also be
focusing on and this again again you
know feel free to to identify a stretch
of road an intersection um or or group
or a circumstance that we want to make
sure that people are um that the that
the plan picks up so I'll I'll shut up
for a moment and just take notes if
people have things to
offer Eric did you have anything you
wanted to add at this point oh plenty
but you're the commission I'm not the
commission so I think it's better to
hear from all of you first okay any of
the commission members have any comments
on what uh would John walk us through
there
I had a thought that doesn't really
maybe going with plan conservation and
development but I thought how 100 years
ago the railroad was the lifeline for
getting in and out of endover and now
we're looking at the rail trail doing a
lot of the same kind of thing providing
a way to get around town and a safer
thing than being on the main roads for
people on bicycles and walking it's an
interesting connection
that's a good I like the Thum I remember
when I was a kid my father telling me he
would come in um before his parents
moved to Andover and they would take the
train in from Hartford get off at Center
Street and walk up to my parents or my
uh Uncle Eddie's Farm which was on
wheeling Road
um you know
the the problem with Route Six is it
really divided the town kind of into two
equal you know and that's been the case
almost since the day it was built I mean
I know when I was a kid um when I
started off the Only Rule my father had
bicycling was I could not ride across
Route Six so everything on the North
half of town and much of centry was mine
but you know I couldn't go to the school
you know and I couldn't visit my friends
that lived over on shotty Mill CU I
wasn't allowed to ride across the street
so there was no light back then the
lights are new yep um so and and kind of
the other thing is I've been kind of
looking at the big
picture
and you know first of all we we talk
about the safety issues in the town
Andover as a pedestrian and as a cyclist
and they are real but I also don't want
to over you
know overly sensitize people to this
because of all the places I ride my
bicycle and over is a genuinely safe
place to ride overall are their problems
sure
um you know there's no question
that um you know there are always some
risks but you know so we have a
relatively safe and most of our rural
roads are fine for walking and cycling
you know if you have a
culdesac um it doesn't really need
anything you know in terms of complete
streets it's already basically a
complete streak if you were going to do
anything you could drop the speed limit
a little bit but that's basically all
you have to do there's nothing more so
what we're talking about is kind of the
backbone roads you know the shoddy Mills
and the Long Hill roads
uh in the hendes of the world and saying
okay what are the things we can do to
those roads to make them work for a
cyclist or pedestrian or somebody on any
kind of micro Mobility
device um you know and then how do we
how do we change the focus and how do we
adapt to the fact that
ebikes you know are now a thing and if
you start looking in any cities they're
a a significant component of the
mobility you know in cities uh and
certainly if you look to Europe a
bicycle you know and a scooter or an
ebike you know become a significant
fraction of the
population uh you know traveling and
that and so what do you do as a
municipality to kind of encourage
that you know without you know we're
still going to
spend 96 % of our transportation dollars
on roads to make cars you know to repair
damage done by cars and make it work for
cars but we need to be spending a
portion of it to work for everybody else
um and that's really what what complete
streets is um if you've never heard of
the term Vision zero that was something
that came out of that was a European
concept came out of Sweden initially um
um and it was a response to um School
moms that were
complaining um actually not in Sweden
and Holland I'm sorry that were
complaining that too many of their kids
were getting killed you know on Dutch
streets and so the Dutch government
really took that to heart in the 1970s
and said okay we're going to figure out
how to make this actually work so
everybody can ride their bikes and
everybody can be safe and if you go back
to 19 19 7 and compare Holland in the
United States there was very little
difference they were both predominantly
car-based cultures and they had similar
pedestrian cycling and automobile F
fatality rates and then you forecast to
today where they've spent the last 50
years working on that you know and it's
now seven or eight times safer to be a
cyclist in Holland and it's 10 or 12
times safer to be a pedestrian in
Holland so we have the
potential you know to save a lot of
lives um you know and at the same time
start reforming how we deal with
automobiles on our roads because the
reality is you know the majority of
people that are killed on roadways are
still drivers of
automobiles um and so what Vision zero
is is the concept that
um basically people are going to do dumb
things whether they are texting or
whether they are just tired or whether
they are just daydreaming about the
problems they had at work I mean I know
a couple weeks ago I drove through a red
light I was completely zoned out drove
right through the intersection realized
I have I the guy coming the other way
put his braks on and you know and and
I've been the other guy too um so we all
we all make mistakes the idea is to make
the roads in the intersection such that
if somebody makes a
mistake it's not going to kill anybody
and that's really kind of the goal um in
a nutshell one of the things that that I
don't think has gotten any significant
press but is always a concern of mine
especially with the windy roads is the
number of landscape companies or tree
companies that they Park the big
trailers right on a curve and you have
no visibility going around the curve and
you just kind of hold your breath and
and go out around the guy hoping that
there's nobody coming the other way and
frequently enough the traffic slow
enough that there is nobody coming
but I uh every time I go around one of
those guys it's on a curve because they
always Park you know where it's
convenient for them not for for the
traffic uh it bothers me yeah and don't
know what the solution is but I do feel
more at risk at that particular
moment
yeah okay well I wanted to go through
the complete streets first because I
knew Eric had a good product ready to go
and uh and I knew how you know we all
know how passionate he is about this and
so I know it would be a good product
ready to go and it was it is and so
uh that
uh so um okay a couple of things if I
might Jen Y so first thing in in the in
the chat I just note that um anarie um
had posted a sort of a question to
comment saying uh you know I we we
talked about the state roots and and she
didn't think we could do anything about
state roads um for example Boston Hill
is awful with people speeding it's not
safe at all to walk um I you know and
obviously we don't control those and we
don't necessarily call the shots however
um a lot can happen uh on state roads if
the municipality is a is a forceful
actor and I would I would point out you
know example number one right now is
that the town got um you know $3 million
from the state um in order to make a
state route um safer uh at at basically
our initiative but but the state is very
willing to see investment although you
know they don't necessarily make the
make or prioritize the investment
themselves but if it's directed by the
town in this case a grant that we helped
write um you know the the improvements
can be made to State routs um uh you
know for for safety pedestrian
friendliness and and that sort of thing
and I can I can note in many many of the
towns I work in most of the sidewalks
that we're getting funded and installing
are on state roads so a lot of that
stuff um Can Happen um you know again if
if it becomes a state if it becomes a
town priority and a key way for it to
become a town priority is again
inclusing including it in the plan of
conservation and development um so
that's that's Point number one um Point
number two is again if there are other
comments I'm I'm happy to add them I
don't want to cut things off although
Jed's the chairman around here um what I
would note is I'm going to take these
comments as well as sort of the outline
we created in this PowerPoint
presentation and start roughing out an
actual substantive text chapter of the
planet conservation and development for
your review ideally in advance of the
next meeting and at the next meeting we
will um have a conversation about
another one of the six uh vision
statements um and and you know that's up
to that's up to Jet I believe that that
you know we're going to be inviting the
Conservation Commission um to you know
an upcoming to an upcoming meeting and
they're going to talk about natural
resource preservation and open space um
yeah I sent out uh I sent out an email
within the last couple days to Maryann
guile and haven't heard back from her
yet but offered her opportunity to come
talk to us his early as next meeting
okay so then
that that I would point out for
influencing you know things on the state
route is when we were putting in the
Dollar General store you know that we
had the 50 m hour speed limit
picking up right before you got to
Dollar General and the extra Mart across
the street and and all that and and the
town sent something off
uh and it was really from the comments
of the people at the public hearing
Planning and Zoning sen it to uh the
board of selectman board of selectman
sent it to the do and they lowered the
speed limit a little bit not as much as
I was hoping they would you know he
asked to go down to 40 but they lowered
it to 45 so you know that was a little
bit of uh an area where we were able to
put some shapy minded stuff in there
right so the town the town does have
some some ability even though we don't
own the streets um but yeah know if the
if the town is is putting its
essentially its Grant dollars and its
and its local policies um forward in a
way that would sort of push the state uh
to make some of their roads safer um
that's that's something um that we can
definitely do and my hope is you know
sort of with a semi amateur eye on this
I I do get the sense that the dot has
become at least a bit friendlier um to
some of these some of these improvements
and Eric you can correct me if I'm wrong
but I think the the commissioner I think
that the last couple of Commissioners
have been at least very friendly to the
to the
concept they're under a lot of heat now
because the traffic fatalities are so
high well yeah there are a couple things
one um every time the state fails
it's so every year the state has to
propose to the federal government what
it's what its metrics are for safety on
state
roads um and they have to get Buy in
from all the regional councils of
government um so every year they put
these things out and they haven't met
their goals in
like a long time and their goals are not
aggressive I mean you know their goals
are kind of pathetic and the state is
not meeting them and every time that
happens the the repercussion is the
state funding from the Federal
Transportation dollars an increasing
fraction of that has to go into safety
counter measures on state roads because
State's not giving you money to build
new stuff until you prove the stuff you
have has been made safer so there is
more money in the pipeline the other
thing that's um the commissioner uh the
do commissioner is named Gary ukalo he's
been in for about a year and a half
um
he was hit by an automobile in
Washington DC and hospitalized for a uh
considerable period of time so he as an
individual has internalized the
ramifications of not having safe streets
and the directive right now at do is
every time they have a construction
project they have to either meet the
state's guidelines for complete streets
and safe Street systems or uh the only
two people in the do that can grant an
exception are commissioner uko himself
or the chief engineer for the state of
Connecticut those are the only two
people to authorize you know if there's
some reason they can't meet the Z so the
state has made a 180° shift from where
they were 5 years ago which is very
refreshing so does that mean we would
have more Pole now adding more
crosswalks over Route Six like like at
uh Lake Road maybe one over the other
the other side of the library you know
going for the other direction on Route
Six we talked about it last time I was
on planning zoning and there was a lot
that wasn't as it wasn't didn't seem as
doable back then and now we're looking
at 3 316 improvements and Y bunch of the
towns around us have this the unon side
roads where there's a especially the
rail trail that hit a button the lights
Flash and Y so I think those are very
effective yeah they're they're more
effective than because I go down to one
of those I'm looking for
somebody can't always see them but boy I
see those flashing may not be able to do
them everywhere but you know and they're
on the street with the higher speed LS
right especially yeah yeah yeah cuz one
of the things that was very interesting
is the federal department of the Federal
Transportation actually Federal Highway
safety administration did a nationwide
study of crosswalks and what they were
trying to determine in the study was
whether making the crosswalks more
visible in other words the difference
between basic crosswalk what they call
an enhanced crosswalk which is not the
the flashing yellow uh rapid flashing
beacons but just you know better look
bigger more visible yeah more visible
whether that would increase the chances
of somebody stopping for a pedestrian in
a crosswalk um at the same time they had
a camera set up and they had a radar at
the
intersections and what they published
was very interesting is that at a
crosswalk if the the biggest difference
is how fast the car is going
irregardless of the speed limit on of
road if somebody's doing 30 m an hour
there's only a 15 to 20% chance they
will stop for somebody at a crosswalk
regardless of whether they could see
them or not because they did all the
test crosswalks where there was plenty
of visibility so you could see the guy a
quarter mile away waiting to cross and
people blew by it um as soon as you get
the speeds down to around 20 M hour
around 75% of the people stop for so the
biggest determination of whether people
are going to stop for somebody in a
crosswalk is vehicle speed um and
because of that the federal uh highway
safety administration has a series of
more enhanced counter measures based on
the traffic count of the road and then
how fast uh the 85th percentile speed of
it is so okay I think I'd like to call
the complete streets a wrap at this
point and move on to the next item which
is uh Jim the uh Gravel Pit
update okay two things one
is Alan Cho from p and Sage will
be fing has prepared a lawsuit a
complaint I believe is right term and
will be it will be served sometime Serv
and
filed Court in the next week I believe
um he was waiting he Incorporated some
changes based on suggestions from both
Jed and I
and the appeal period may or may not
have been a factor in the the timing the
second issue
is Bill genes has applied four
variants to basically seeking relief
from the requirement that 2 Ines of top
soil be placed placed on the site that's
scheduled for hearing tomorrow night
before the
CBA see how that
goes we do have an opinion on that we
have
questions say again we ask questions
sure yeah so what's his
hardship might okay his hardship I
believe it stated that he just made the
the argument that the the site will be
reused it's a waste of time I'm not I'm
not he has no hardship okay you want my
opinion okay but that's what he used the
hardship is sort of self-created uh and
we made him we being the town made him
regrade that property and the top soil
was lost when in actual fact it was
regraded because it was was PR wrong
initially it wasn't wasn't functioning
according to to
plan I mean should should that variance
be granted he would then the up would
then have to come back
to to the planning loading commission
once
again now I thought about going to the
zba meeting in uh
didn't really want to go because I think
that's you know I like the fact that
planning or zoning is separate from
zoning board of appeals but we've
certainly put enough time in on this
that I was thinking about going in to
make sure that we covered all the
rationale for for not having a hardship
um I was advised that that was not a
good move and so I won't and uh Jim I
don't know if you saw the later in the
day there was email you know from Mark
BR with some
other I did I did see it okay other
stuff pertaining to you uh you at that
meeting so I I was thinking about going
and uh and now thought better of that
and uh we're going to count on Jim to uh
to provide the right input there yeah
quite frankly I try and
stay I don't try to stay out out of the
opinion side of things on CBA for the
same reason that ched does but but in
this case I can at least prepare a
background
statement get some information out there
which I think we'll be pretty much say
it all
right okay move on
goad Jim if your staff why would you
want to stay out of it isn't that the
point for you to
um you know you're the land use staff so
aren't you going to be there in that
capacity
yes I understand I agree with you to to
an extent it's that I mean there only
word of appeals is the whole concept is
when is
this when do these regulations when are
they too honorous or when when do they
not really F what's unique to this parti
and I I leave that
argument to the
applicant right Jim Jim's job is to
enforce the regulations as they are and
and zba's job is to essentially say when
they shouldn't apply as strictly as
they're written and so it's not that's
not really Jim's job but obviously he
can go by way of background and say you
know why the applicant is being held to
this standard um because of the
regulations because of the conditions of
the of the special permit um but yeah
again it's it's zba is in a Judiciary
role sort of saying when when the rules
should not apply because of something
unique to that
property but I guess what I'm saying is
you know Jim um I guess I I I sort of
understand and I sort of don't um as you
said the job is enforcement and it's up
to any given applicant to show why they
shouldn't have to do something not just
because it's in in convenient for them
so um you know I
think uh I don't know um I think there
is going to need to be some
reinforcement because there's so much
going on with this application and that
needs to be made very
clear who's going to explain to the zba
that
he allowed under all his cop
soil that would be me I mean explain
that whole thing that I'll how it
transpired I'm not going to give the
whole history I see no play that I think
it's personally I think it's more cut
and dried than that you know it's an
issue of the regulations for Good Reason
require at least two inches of top soil
then there's no two inches of top soil
there and there's no reason with that
configuration of a lot that they can't
have two inches of top soil there right
so I you know to get Jim can certainly
get into that
history
um but we gave him a year of opportunity
to prove he could grow grass on with
that top soil there and that experiment
didn't go very well you know the whole
the whole reason that there is a cbaa is
is so that an applicant property owner
has the opportunity to make their
argument to somebody somebody else other
than his
Zing it's another which is why I I try
not to get too
involved Jim's job is to ensure that we
don't have to go and appeal the
decision that that would be right his is
to
present I guess I'm not understanding
about I'm not Jim I'm not sure if you Ed
the word abstaining or refraining or
something
um because I I just want to make sure
that the information comes
across because otherwise they're just
going to be hearing from the applicant
I understand I think a background
statement
is will will do
that and is that coming from you or from
one of the
attorneys both actually I I mean the
attorney did the attorney did say that
um and we have some pretty stute folks
on on the zoning board of appeals that
have that grasp what a hardships all
about
I think in the last few years the board
has um gotten a little stricter with
respect to granting
variances and Mr chair
okay Jen can I jump in for a second yeah
yeah so the the other thing and I mean
yeah I would I would second I don't know
I don't know the zba that well um but
but I think ZB in general have gotten
better at understanding what hardships
are and particularly um there there's
been some there's been some uh legal
Publications recently over the last two
three years that have indicated um some
some 80 to 90% of of variances are
granted inappropriately where there is
no legal hardship um and and should it
be appealed which is to say if you know
if for some reason this slips past zba
and ZB says oh sure that's a hardship
you can you can skip putting this top
soil down if if the town chooses to or
if anyone chooses to appeal it and and
in many cases I've seen Planning and
Zoning commissions appeal zba rulings um
if there's no hardship the judges work
that out quickly um so so I I would not
if if the overall goal is
to um prevent you know this this
variance from occurring um you know the
zba
uh should take care of it and if not the
courts will will quickly take care of
it okay
thanks any other questions on the gravel
bin Mr chair this is Katherine
Hutchinson um I will can make those at
the public speak at the end if you
prefer
okay I want to move on to new business
at this point um
and the playground improvements at the
Andover Elementary School and John if
you can uh post the grind that I sent
you this
afternoon all right can you see that uh
I can and uh yeah I could see I can see
enough what we need to do yeah okay I
can I can zoom in where where needed if
you'd like so
so so this you know I I think it was
last Thursday I became aware of the fact
that uh you know the uh for of Ed and
the PTA were were trying to put in some
some new playground equipment at the
school and
uh the initial thought was that it was
an expansion of a
playground and uh so we I was I was
looking into this a little bit over the
weekend and and I went
over um to the
school yesterday morning seems like a
long time ago now uh with celest Willard
who is I think correct me if I'm wrong
Celeste PTA president and the chief
chairman of the board of
EV and and we went over to look and uh I
was thinking
that what we were going to do was put
something in because when I talked to
Celeste she said it would be entirely
within an existing playground area and
so the the drawing that I was looking at
only had the two two playay areas that
are over on the left hand side of the
school behind the spool there there a
couple of boxes and I know you can't
read them John you might be able to put
your cursor on it to say play areas over
there there's one there's two yep that
circles of both I thought it was going
to be in there but uh it wasn't and and
so where she uh where the the school
wants to put the playground equipment is
in all the way over on the right hand
side of uh the screen where it says play
area uh it's right behind where the
little basketball court is there and
uh no further over to the right all the
way to where they your curse all the way
to the Border there more to the
right right there FL area in the back
behind that basketball
thing and and that's where the equipment
is going to go and uh and so this is a a
fairly new drawing this is is the
drawing that uh the town had done when
we were doing the lot line correction
you know is part of uh finishing up the
uh survey that uh we did to uh to build
the community center there and this
little play area showed up and
so um my thinking is that uh so we're
going to put some new playground
equipment into an existing playground
area and that probably you know is not
an item that's of a concern to the
planning is
own um Celeste was kind enough to come
tonight just in case we had any
questions on it um you know she's uh
we're we're learning to work together
better it was still a little bit of a
short fused item I think the stuff shows
up if it didn't show up today it's
within the next day or so but uh but
we're working together to try and you
know make sure that we're we're doing
things right and I appreciate celeste's
effort on that uh and she's here in case
anybody had any questions about that
what what you know I was trying to avoid
was stuff going in and and people saying
what's going on over there we don't know
nothing about that and uh and so she
came tonight to make sure that uh you we
had the opportunity to ask any questions
that that we might
have so do any of the commission members
have any questions for Celeste at this
point on on what it is that she's
actually putting
in and it looks uh it looks like there's
no questions here Celeste so I think
uh you are off and running you you need
nothing else from Planning and Zoning
with respect to the playground area
thank you thank you very much uh Mr
Larson and members of the uh the board I
appreciate your uh cooperation and thank
you very much for your time tonight and
thank you for putting this on the agenda
so quickly thank you okay J could I go
ahead yeah J um I believe that it would
still require a zoning permit it would
be an administrative function would
there would not be could be done very
quickly um but the equipment would
probably meet the definition of a a
structure and such should require a
permit and a Zing permit is something
different in a planning is zoning permit
so you know that
uh I'll let Jim get a hold of you to uh
to tell you what that is but it's got
nothing to do with the zoning
regulations and that they'll be
relatively simple selest very easy
selest okay as long as it's very
easy um okay so who do I who do I
contact for that M Mr hesy yes okay I'll
give you a call tomorrow and um uh work
with you on on getting that and is it
ANC application process or what what is
the if you could just give me a simple
one page one page form yes application
okay do I have to post a sign or
anything or or anything like that no so
you should
WR okay I'll be are you in the office
tomorrow briefly in the morning yes okay
all right I'll give you a call thank you
very much everyone appreciate it good
day thank you have a good evening
bye next item up is the approval of the
minutes from the public hearing on
September 17th and the regular meeting
on September
17th so I'll make a motion well let's
let's go through see if anybody's got
any comments first and and then I will
make a motion to uh approve them as
amended I have comment yet okay go
number nine um Patrick dordy asked to
rejoin Economic Development commission I
I believe I thought he was looking for
guidance as to whether that was
appropriate it was more of U how do I go
about it because the the economic
development commission was down on
membership and okay they it was a a
letter in intent was written by me to
the town clerk but um my My ultimate
question was uh any kind of conflict of
interest in right talking to or or
addressing any proposed um uh
additional uh usages for the uh
agricultural business that would that
came to talk to us so um but he'll he's
being addressed by the planning zoning
commission separately and we that's I
think on the agenda for plan
conservation yeah so I'm just suggesting
the
minutes better better reflect that all
right and uh tomorrow night's the
meeting for that commission I think
Elaine
the the chair of that commission went to
the board of selectman to get
uh
recommendations and I don't know that
was done or not but yes the board of
Selectmen uh you are appointed oh thanks
to the EDC
great so Jim did you have a specific
wording recommendation instead of asked
uh would uh
how about we say Patrick I already
mentioned he planned to rejoin the
economic development commission that's
fine we okay it looked just very
incomplete sort of dangling there I'm G
add like our conflict or no just you
know it gave us a chance to uh to
consider it and we consider that it was
fine any other comments uh on the
minutes
and I did have I did have a couple um up
at the top public present for the
regular
meeting as I recall Katherine Hutchinson
attended the regular meeting too I could
not imagine that she would not attend
while we were acting on that uh well so
I didn't go back to watch the video but
I'm fairly confident that she was in
attendance and then down in paragraph
two the
second line in the non-bolded stuff it
says top soil grass and loan that should
be loan
L and then in the next line down instead
of a to address
application and restoration plan instead
of reclamation plan
and then the
uh at the very end of that
paragraph Katherine Hutchinson comment
regarding addressing how the property is
currently graded and reviewed as built
regrading will need to be done to
conform with plan filed and I had
mentioned that the grading had been done
over the last several days um on the
site and those were the only comments
that I had anybody else have any
comments on the
minutes hearing none I'll make a motion
to approve the minutes as
amended okay we'll let and do it this
time Scott had the last
one any
discussion hearing that I'll call for a
vote an Scott I Patrick I
Leanne hi and I vote I as well
the motion the minutes for both the
public hearing and the regular meeting
are approved as
amended next up uh on the agenda is
correspondence Jim do we have any
correspondence to discuss none none
okay administrative reports uh we did
not have a Inland Wetlands meeting this
month so uh I think to report on that
Jim zoning agent report I am following
up on a few complaints um specifically
sign complaints
were numerous signs down in the corner
of Lake Road and Route Six which some
somehow disappeared I I don't know what
happened to them in all honesty but
they're
gone also gotten a few complaints
regarding election science which I'm I'm
following up on what I do intend to do
hopefully tomorrow morning is is send
out a copy of the the recently adopted
sign well the existing sign regulation
to the chairs of of the two two party
the two chairs of the
commissions just as a reminder I I had I
did meet with the owner of Protek I'm
sorry Benjamin Franklin um
regarding a violation notice and he is
working on a site plan to to bring that
site into compliance Al so got a few
light complaints which I'm I'm chasing
down that's all I have open Ed
questions any questions for
Jim okay next Up's Town planner
John um I don't have much additional to
report other than working on the pccd um
I will note that I had a good
conversation with uh Mr Kier sha who is
the current owner of the Andover Plaza
um just as a matter of of sort of
Economic Development Outreach um he is
uh looking to put some new tenants in is
going to update the signage um
apparently the Chinese restaurant is
going to be replaced by a a Thai or
Vietnamese restaurant um a a place that
they sell F
primarily um and he seemed very open to
um opportunities for connectivity um if
he was he was willing to talk about
connecting to the airline Trail I'm
sorry the Hop River Trail um as well as
looking at uh maybe some some Municipal
cost share or some incentives to do some
um facade or facility improvements um so
uh we're going to schedule a time for
Eric and I to go and visit with him on
site uh to talk about some of these
opportunities but he he certainly seemed
willing to um you know to to try to be a
a more um active uh property owner in
improving the the plaza he did Express
um some Financial issues that basically
they bought the plaza right before covid
um basically at the heat at the height
of the market before retail crashed
entirely so he's a little bit
financially strapped but is certainly
willing to to try to make uh
improvements as he's able but we'll
follow up on
that okay anything
else um well this is I I did I have been
working with
um uh Ryan
um uh I'm sorry Fitch thank you um about
some potential uh zoning regulations to
for AGR tourism or event facilities on
Farmland um I don't is that later on the
agenda it is and it's G to be the very
next thing so that
that we'll we'll shift from
administrative reports to commission
discussion miscellaneous and first up is
uh regul to allow uses in sillery to a
farm operation so I'll turn it over to
you John okay so again um you'll recall
at last month's meeting um there was
some discussion about uh the continuing
ability of um the fitches to hold uh
concerts weddings other special events
at their at their one of their tree farm
properties um and that's currently not
enabled by the zoning
regulations um and so there was some
back and forth and I had sort of offered
to uh assist Mr Fitch in putting some
ideas
together um I don't know if he's there
today um but we we went back and forth
uh on email and I and I shared some
examp excuse me some examples from other
communities and with a little bit of
input from Mr fit tailored it a little
bit um and pre uh presented to Jed and I
think Jed you forwarded this around
right draft aggr tourism regulation um
based on something that I'd written last
year in no geeez this is October so
earlier this year in the town of East
Hampton um I'm I'm happy to put it on
the screen if you'd like um that it's
kind of goes through kind of two
categories of um farm farm based uses
one being you know with with some Nexus
to the farm whether that's you know hay
rides or or you know a pick your own or
corn maze or things like that that are
sort of farm related that you know sort
of play up the the public interface with
the farm itself which could be an as of
right type use a zoning permit type use
and then um other other activities that
use the land but don't have a clear
Nexus to the farm and this would include
things like concerts wedding events um
special Gatherings um you know private
parties that sort of thing that would
require special permit um and I kind of
detailed it a little bit but before I
don't want to get too far into this
because again I I had done this
initially as
a uh a favor or some technical expertise
to offer to Mr Fitch um with the idea
that he would be the applicant on a
proposed text Amendment um but I you
know he he didn't seem to grab that I
and I don't I don't want to go too far
into advocacy for this because again I
you know I don't know if the commission
wants to take this up as as a topic of
their own um you know of their own
leadership of their own initiative or
you know would you prefer to have this
presented essentially by Mr Mr Fitch or
someone else as a
private uh text Amendment application so
I I didn't I I wanted to be careful
about which side of the fence I was on
here when in preparing these rags
so having uh you know given that a
little thought I would
prefer that we the town you sort of take
the lead on coming up with a regulation
because that way we can have a better
shot at making the regulation what we
think is
reasonable not that what you proposed
isn't reasonable but uh you know I think
I also sent around to the commission the
the wedding venue
regulation and the Agro tourism
regulation for Colombia and and they
were
both in my
mind more I was going to say
significantly more
restrictive um than than what the
proposal that you agreed to with working
with with Mr Fitch and so you know I
think you know one of the concerns I had
and I know Jim made the same comment on
it was you know we do do concerts here
at the Town Hall in the summer a couple
of times and we do them over at the link
and somehow you know I would like to
avoid the comment why are you regulating
me but not the
town and uh and I don't know what the
answer is there I was going to ask you
and then I forgot to send you an email
yeah how does Columbia Columbia has
concerts every now and then I think
somewhere don't even know where it is
but
how do they regulate those maybe they
don't I I don't think they do actually I
think you know sort of oneoff type of
Municipal
functions and that was that was my
thought about the town you know we maybe
do two or three concerts a year uh the
lake does probably two a
year and and so none of those are a big
hardship on anybody and I think in both
cases are probably done by 8:00 in the
evening on Fridays or Saturday nights as
opposed to Mr Fitz wanted to go to 9 or
10 I can't remember but you know we
maybe we have a concert from 7 to 9 6:
to 8 something like that but we
certainly don't go to 10:00 and it's
very limited in number so I I would like
to have something that we do that limits
him but other than that you know I
thought the tie in to the
non-agricultural things the way that you
had it was good I see the signs are up
for the funky monkey thing going on soon
and and I think maybe Mr Fitch you know
thinks he's got what he wants now we
didn't tell him to stop
anything uh and so he's got no incentive
to come to us with regulations at this
point and uh you know I'm thinking that
he probably won't have an outdoor
concert until next spring late spring
summer and so we've got some time to
come through what we think is right he
can he can come talk through US public
hearing on that
um but that's
how that was my cut I I'm open to uh you
know thoughts from the commission after
giving you what I thought about
that anybody uh anybody else have any
thoughts
there yeah Patrick I I wasn't able to
find it quickly in our our RS but is it
currently our noise ordinance
10:00 p.m. for the town we don't have a
noise or oh okay so you know and and
that gets
into into the difficulty with measuring
sound and I know John and his draft
talked about the the state uh State
guidelines guidelines and I spent some
time trying to figure those out and it
wasn't easy for me they had different
you it was more like industrial
Machinery inside a building or something
but I I didn't see how we would apply
those necessarily I think we I don't
know I'm Still Still stumped there that
that I don't want to recreate the wheel
but I need to have something that I can
understand as well what it was going
through Scott
and lean any any
thoughts yes but not about I I have a
question and a comment while we're still
in open in commission discussion but
it's not about Brian Fitch or the um you
know I read the materials you sent about
weddings and AGR tourism Etc but I my
comment and question is about something
else okay we we'll get to it in a minute
or two then yeah I just thinking of one
thing about the idea of you know the
town has concerts at the Gazebo would he
say well why AR you regulating them I'm
thinking when the town has stuff at the
Gazebo they're probably not charging for
the concert or the use of the facility
whereas Fitch down there in his farm
he's probably charging somebody to use
the facility so that makes it a
different situation and we probably do
need to have some regulations for that
well and in his comeback when when asked
about that was we don't charge anybody
it's donations and
he says he takes donations yes he
doesn't charge anybody he just accepts
donations which which is kind of that's
the the standard boot B for anybody who
does those kinds of things yeah but
still I think there's something
about you know sometimes when people are
going to have a noisy party in their
yard they go to all the neighbors one
they invite them yeah and they make sure
that you know they're they they get them
on board before they do that um
but you know I think what I've seen the
lake do what I've seen the town do I
think they few and far between the one
neighbor that come to talk to us is
concerned about how often are they going
to be having these concerts you know it
keeps expanding and uh and I didn't
think that our concerts went very late
at night and we
not not anything there petry's had some
discussions or problems with
a winery up in comentry there and they
with their events and things so I don't
know how they managed to solve that if
they have well and and I think I think
it was a winery down in Columbia what
John sent you know they talk about
having the the musical venue inside the
building and if they put it in a tent
outside it's got to be what's considered
a soundproof tent
so there's there's one example of you
know trying to mitigate the noise I
think I I was talking to somebody might
have been an Marie uh at one of the
recent but probably the last meeting we
were talking about this I know the
neighbors out at Carter Farm in marbor
have uh complained and and they either
limit
their their uh thing their their
concerts to earlier in the day I went
online looks like one they're done for
the year but uh you they'd have some
Friday night things that I can't
remember when they went but it might
have been 8 or nine o'clock certainly
not 10 o00 and that sort of thing okay
and then you know Columbia took the
approach here's one for AGR tourism and
then they did another set of regulations
for the you the the wedding venue place
that they want to build and again that's
all indoor noise uh but everybody's
concerned East Hampton just you know the
river last week talked about the people
who were going to put in the the venue
to have concerts pull the permit because
uh they got so much backlash on that
so um any that's that's what I think
about uh about that and uh I would like
to regulate the gamut but I think
concerts all a special place in there
because they are noisier and affect the
neighbors more than the other stuff does
anybody else you're going to wait until
he approaches the commissioner no I I I
intend to uh you continue working with
John to try and you come up with with
something and and I would like to by
next spring we've got a regulation and
we're going out to the neighbors and him
for public comment on it uh but it's
what we think is
reasonable
and that's
that's a that's what I'd like to do we
got a couple of months to work on that
just like I was hoping that we had a
couple of months to work on the soccer
lights but we chose not to do that until
we wanted to go put the lights on again
right
unfortunate a little bit any other any
other comments
on the farm operation if I should or not
oh go ahead I I was wondering if anybody
has if um any contact has been made with
Phil Chester in
Leon because they they have a lebin is a
largely agricultural Community Y and
they they do have a lot of zoning
liances revolving around agriculture in
town okay I
don't there's something John can look at
I know he sent out to Columbia things
because he's a town planner for Columbia
as well so yeah I mean I've worked with
Phil for 20 years and and have found
this the L and zon regulations if it's
not strictly agriculture it tends not to
be particularly Progressive it's very
protective of Agriculture and supportive
of Agriculture as
agriculture but it it doesn't tend to be
particularly supportive
of broader activity something about
noise I know that
sure but yeah happy to work with you on
J on it Jed y corn growing is very quiet
so anyhow yeah that's that would be my
goal John is uh is over the course of
the
winter in all your spare time we have a
chance to sort out how we might at least
recognize the town and the lake are
doing some concerts too and and maybe it
needs a
concert um regulation in in section four
of our RS or something but but those are
the goals that that I would be shooting
for and not necessarily driven by Mr
Fitch I think if we wait for him we uh
be waiting a long time okay sounds
good um next item up is just uh I wanted
to quickly address seasonal
dwellings and you we we've got uh we're
going to have
uh an application at some
point the fell at 268 Lake Road it's a
little three season
house and uh he wants to rebuild put
into a Four Season
house and so the first question you ask
yourself is how do you know it's a
three- season
house and the only answer I can come up
with is because it's always been that
way which normally isn't a very good
answer um certainly there's there's
nothing
in the town records that show which
houses are three season and which aren't
way back when Andover Lake first started
there were a lot of people that built
little cabins didn't have heating on
them uh or any of that stuff and and
they used them during the summer and
we've got the definition of a seasonal
dwelling which is a house that is
occupied from May through
October doesn't allow June through
November or or anything other than that
um but when you ask yourself what a
three- season house is you know it
probably doesn't have heat uh not well
insulated all those kind of things and I
don't think there's any of those out
there right now the two the two seasonal
houses that I'm aware
of uh the other one is I think it's 290
or 296 Lake Road right down the other
side of me and uh and it's a very nice
house very small Lots both of them and
the
uh but you know the small lot that's
296 is maybe a quarter of an acre
the house right next to it which is a
yearound house is
0.8 Acres let me write down now and
so now if you look at the at the chart
where where this person would have to go
to get a
variance uh it's got you know a
significant difference in in size of the
number of square feet on a lot but the
square feet that's required in either
case is much bigger than most of the
lots that are on the lake and so my
thought is that the time
for seasonal house regulations is come
and gone you know we don't have seasonal
houses over there as long as they can
meet the uh sanitation
requirements um they're good to go
anybody that's going to build a house on
Andover Lake now is going to build a
nice house that uh that that's all year
round so my my thought was to have that
conversation a little bit and probably
not in a crisis manner but uh and I
don't know when Wayne's going to come
and do that but I think we should just
get rid of the seasonal requirements
because we don't know what houses are
there and uh and they're all they can
all meet the definition of year round
because they got heat
water and all that kind of stuff at
least I think I'm not I don't know how
we would even find out see which ones
don't
any any comments from the commission
before I start Ping around with that a
little
bit say there's hardly any left that are
seasonal well I say I have a word of too
and it's just by tribal knowledge out
there that you they've always been that
way you somebody says show me something
that says at the seasonal house but I
couldn't do
it it looks like seasonal and year round
definitions of permitted uses are
virtually identical I didn't verify that
yet but yeah if you look at the so it's
the uh it's the chart in section
11.2 where you get into different
fundage requirements and that sort of
thing but they're all way in excess of
uh what the majority of the houses are
on the
Lakes the only the only place where
seasonal dwellings comes up in the
regulations other than the definition is
conversion from seasonal to year round
is a special permit used in the lake
Zone the only only reference that I'm
aware
of but we were talking at some point Jim
about the fact that if he's got a
seasonal house he's already got the
variant to go to that smaller lot and
now he wants to build a full season
house he'd have to go to uh the zba
prove a hardship in which which anybody
that's building the house on the on the
lake 90% you know don't meet the
requirements they're all something and
so why you know why make it all that
harder for something where these houses
are are bigger than a lot of the year
round
houses yeah I think initially it may
have been a great
idea was a great idea time's com and
gone yeah my
thinking okay so none of them make it
most of them don't make most most of
them don't make the space requirement
yeah not even close and so anyhow I'll
start working on that and and just so
you know I went through the rest of the
chart of all those things that we wanted
to put in the r that we had identified
were problems including in the flood
zone and uh you I got those ready to go
on the next edition of whatever comes
down the bike and and so maybe it'll be
seasonal dwellings and uh concerts but
we're I'm ready to take care of the
flood zone issues uh I
think okay moving on to
10c is
signs and Scott you were asking you to
have that on the
agenda anything in particular you want
to talk about with the with the signs I
just wanted to you know to clarify
to
everyone um you know there's a
difference between political signs and
election
signs which if you read it you would
think political sign was an elri
election sign but it's not political
sign
is no
different and um that the square footage
requirements are different and and
there's
also something that needs to be talked
about with
the on Town property
and you know apparently the board of
Selectmen had a meeting and they
addressed signs on the town's
property and um that's not in the
regulations
either okay so you know I'll start out
by saying I don't like our town
regulations although I had a hand in
crafting them or trying to reshape them
a little bit
after you about four years ago the issue
came up with respect
to the complaint was we need to be able
to put our political our election signs
out
earlier because we're doing early voting
and all that kind of stuff and and that
was true and
so uh we about that same time we also
started wrestling with the free speech
requirements so somebody can we can't
regulate content on signs at all you
that's uh that's a free speech issue you
you can put uh whatever you feel like on
the Sun but is Scott mentioned political
signs are different than election
signs and election signs you can now put
up as early as you want and I appreciate
the fact that uh you know folks around
down toown showed admirable restraint
and not putting them out there starting
in
May um but once one person you know once
I saw that first sign go out there was a
proliferation of signs and they all
started spreading fast so it's like
anything else once somebody goes that
everybody else goes too but we do have a
requirement that the election signs are
taken down within seven days of an
election just like any other temporary
sign that's taken down within seven days
of completion the
event now we don't have any time
requirements on political signs
difference between a political sign and
election sign is a political sign States
your your point of view where an
election sign talks about a candidate
and there's an end to the election
sign
um and the other requirement that came
with both election signs and political
signs was they we had to allow them to
be as big as any other sign that we
allowed in the district so if we allowed
a 16 square foot sign we had to allow a
16 foot sign and a 16q foot election
sign
um and in 16 square foot is for the
residential
areas because that's as big a sign as we
allow there it's 32 sare fet into
business and industrial areas because we
allow 32 foot sign there
um I thought
we restricted putting signs on Town
property I went looking for that this
afternoon and and we don't restrict
signs from town property what we do have
in our RS is there are no signs on the
town right away or within 15 ft of your
lot line
Eric you had a comment so my comment is
simply that uh the town Board of
selectman in a sense acts as any other
land owner so the right away you get to
regulate but you can't say what it's the
board of Selectmen that gets to say what
signs are on Town property as long as it
conforms to the rest of your sign RS
yep yeah so there's probably a lot of
political sign that we don't want on
Town property because we don't want the
town taking political stance on all the
social
issues but they might allow election
signs we P three when we do but
but our our
regs forbid putting signs in the town
right
away and that's where most of the signs
go and so you and and we knew when we
put that in there you know I would have
just assumed have no temporary signs
into town at all uh that probably wasn't
the right answer but
uh they shouldn't be we said you should
be putting your signs 15 feet back from
the road because that's normally what
the town right away is along the road
and you shouldn't have it within 15 ft
of your property line because we want to
know who's who's putting that sign up
shouldn't be confusing between you and
the neighbor whatever so so that's what
I about signs in in
uh in association with with the election
coming up and
uh I'd be happy to try and answer any
questions we have but it certainly is
not clear and easy to understand as you
go through there I'll be the first to
rent
that any comments on
signs glad that we had the
conversation so I actually have a
question question one
which it it's almost like an
interpretation question but so we have a
regulation that says in the
the uh residential district in the Ard
the maximum size for sign is 16 square
feet and in the business industrial Zone
it's 32 square feet but on a particular
Pro property you can have a maximum of X
number of square feet of signs yep so so
my question comes in when it comes to
town property it's fine for an
individual H homeowner or business owner
to say I will let these people but not
these people this but not that right but
as a town the town can't be making a
decision to put up this sign versus that
sign so given that there's a
specific you know on Town property that
same limit applies
how is that or could that be
enforced
because you know I sort of look at that
and say a maximum of X number square
feet per
candidate
or per what because if it's total the
first guy that comes along that puts up
a 32 square feet and a 16 square feet
locks up that entire piece of town
property for everybody else really that
can be only construed one
lot even if it's Town property right
yeah well I mean the town owns
individual Lots but that whole area
between route 316 and School Road that
is essentially all a single lot single
lot so the question is how do you or how
does that get interpreted in terms of
what is allowed and what is not allowed
right because the the board of Selectmen
may say yeah we're not going to regulate
that which is what they've said in the
past Y and I'm still going with until
they change their mind um but how does
the commission interpret the total limit
on the total square foot of signs is
that per candidate or per total or per
party or per what it says a
lot it it says per lot and and
so my Approach was I wasn't good worry
about that until we were serious about
enforcing all the signs that were in the
town right
away you know we it's it's written
for hes you know and and I haven't gone
out to count the the square footage
there but certainly if you've got a 16
square foot sign uh you're significantly
Limited in how many other signs you can
put out I haven't seen any anybody that
I thought was in violation of the total
square footage thing yeah as I was
driving around you I've seen maybe five
or six little signs but that's that's as
much as I've seen so I I haven't uh gone
off to prove myself unhappy with
anything yet and if I saw hundreds of
signs in front of the Town Hall then I'd
have to go think about it a little bit
because something's not right there but
I haven't seen that yet well ordinarily
both parties just before the election
start you know uh condensing all the
signs and moving a lot of the signs into
that small area so I'm just saying what
is the zoning commission what is the
zoning agents take on that before that
happens because I know I'm going to get
the complaints about it on Election Day
potentially what
does of the other complaint is that it
well and last year there was an issue of
putting putting signs out in front of
the
school the school didn't want them out
there even though that was Town property
it has to be okay by the school why
because it's in there no it's Town
property well the school board education
it says has a right
to say what's what signs go that's what
in there it says that any right I
pretty sure it says the board of
education has the right to have a say
I'm not looking at the regulations so I
can't tell you exactly that's my
recollection I don't see it
but something
believe self-destruct
signal I did I'm not aware of that in
there Scott I think I read it okay it
could be there's stuff in there that you
surprises me all the time put in that
board of education in the in the science
thing see if it comes
up oh I know where it says it and my my
copy's out of date I don't have to do it
we put it in there because because of
the banners because of the
banners you we didn't want yeah that's
right we wanted the to get the
school yeah so what's it say any signs
placed on an of elementary school
building or grounds shall require prior
notification to board of education or
their designate and such sign such signs
shall not impair to the elementary
school building operations determined by
the zon
enforc okay y I have to go look at that
that uh I forgot about that you know
certainly we we didn't want to put
banners up here that the school didn't
want right whether how that plays out in
the election I don't know
right and remember the
area thank you the area in front of
gazebo um is school property so that is
largely I don't know how that gets dealt
with but that seems like a commission
and
Theo yeah um I guess I have to think
fast on that one because that's going to
come up quick
luckily I'll be out of town on Election
Day I don't know I I'll think about that
a little bit that certainly was not the
intention of why those words were put in
there we we didn't want we wanted to
give we were trying to give the Board of
Ed control over the banners and and
those kind of signs around here uh it
had nothing to do with election signs at
the time and uh maybe we shot ourselves
in foot maybe I did but there you go
wouldn't be the first time won be the
last why wouldn't they have say there's
signs on you know
they're only because you you're saying
that it's the town's property it's the
school property what the Gazebo is I'm
just saying if they put them up on the
hill or something y so
um maybe that's something we'll have to
work out with the Board of Ed a little
bit before we get there and we have
certainly
been Cooperative with the chairman of
the board fed for the last couple weeks
last couple months so uh I
uh I think taken that we we actually
when we crafted those words we tried to
put in something that gave all authority
over signs to the board of
education and the feedback we got from
our attorney was no they don't don't get
to uh say what signs are you can get
feedback from them but it's a Planning
and Zoning commission that says what
kind of signs you put out and so that's
why we we modified the words a little
bit to give them a say in that
um but there you are I'll talk to thank
you it's another bad
subject something that's
not
really hav seen the h
yeah just says prior notification so oh
they got 66 yeah they got that little
spot that sign Central okay any other
comments on
signs maybe you could have 32 feet for
32 square feet per
[Music]
um per what every every person yeah per
person per party party yeah party person
party it wouldn't be too too hard this
this election but I may not get there
time for this a harder I will at least
contact Celeste to see if we can put
move the election signs up along here
and not just be in front of town
hall go with
that couple of gray
areas lot there there's a lot of gray
areas and that's what uh you know I
started making the sign regulations
worse instead of better when I was
trying to get rid of all those gray are
just impossible to do I just don't like
it we running down to Rabbit
Hole I'm GNA move on to public comment
uh Katherine Hutchinson are you still
with us yes I
am would you like to make any comments
tonight yes yes I'd like to make the
comment that I agree with the commission
that it's very important that Jim go
there to the to the meeting tomorrow
night because this is a situation in
which the background information and
what led up to where the uh applicant is
um is brought before the zba when
they're hearing the application for your
variance um not only as you all know
that the hardship issue but also the
requirement with regard to it not being
a self-created hardship and I think um
with the background information Jim can
EXP exp laain with regard to the
original approval of the plan was 4 in
uh the regulations have already always
provided for the two in requirement of
the loan and that the party be reclaimed
the parti be reclaimed upon the um
completion uh that he knowing that chose
to go forward with his um project and
now is asking for relief from the zoning
regulations because of the way the
operation was done uh he now doesn't
want to comply with not only what the
commission's original approval was but
what our zoning regulations have already
always uh provided that is the at least
the two inches so I'm glad that
commissioner is having Jim go there to
uh present some of this background
okay yeah and there's a you know final
comment on that the original application
that was approved had that piece of
property divided up into six sections
and the applicant was never supposed to
have more than two sections Disturbed at
one time one section was to be restored
before he s he went on to the next one
and so it has really been
um not quite what we were expecting for
for a long long time
yeah yeah I I think the point you just
made is an excellent one
that and that they need to be made
commission the CBA needs to be made
aware of
that in addition to um the
other we don't know if he sold any of
the top soil off but uh we do know that
he covered it up what he did have
left
so the Great
up but so that's why again I I Pro um
pleased that the commission the Jim is
going to be there and um provide some
background
and thank you for sending him to go y
needless to say I'll be there but thank
you okay you're welcome um any other
public comment
Jed
yeah J this is lean can I just go back
to my with the comment I was going to
make under commission open discussion
yes um it was regarding I'm going back
to the complete streets topic um I
wanted to mention that I think in
addition to the
driving the aspect of of people driving
um the inex in Access speed is is
inexcusable um but I wanted to say that
I feel that some of the responsibility
lies with pedestrians as well um I see
it much more so with pedestrians and
bicyclists but I see people wearing on
Route 6 and other streets um mainly
Route 6 at dusk or after dusk wearing no
light colored or reflective clothing um
I see people walking two or three people
you know in in the street um people you
know listening to music or whatever
they're listening to certainly people on
their phones I've seen people in Andover
and elsewhere walk right out into the
road um I saw an entire family in a
crosswalk at the stores downtown area
very recently um the light was green
they were right in the middle of the
crosswalk their light was red two
children just complete lack of personal
responsibility I've seen it people
especially on phones just walk around
out into traffic so I wanted to make one
last point that because John was making
a list that in addition to doing as much
enforcement whether it's know ticketing
and the you know the physical conditions
of the roads um I think people
especially pedestrians need to take some
personal responsibility too absolutely
takes takes all parties to feel
responsible to make the environment safe
you know and and I think uh another
thing that people underestimate at least
when your eyes get to be as old as mine
are they don't see as well in the uh the
Twilight or whatever and I have been
shocked at times I'll come around the
corner or somebody pops out in front of
me that I didn't see no was there and
uh I guess you know I just fortunate
that one that they were walking facing
traffic and
and moved over to the side of the road
so that I didn't hit them so uh you know
even as safe as I try to be I've got
shortcomings in those areas and uh I
think when you're young you don't
appreciate
that so no and I think you just
mentioned something else not um It's Not
Unusual to see people walking on the
wrong side of the road as
well yep absolutely so yeah it takes uh
everybody needs to take ownership for
making the road safe that's that's the
way it has to be and thank you for your
comment
lean you're welcome thanks Mr chair this
is kathern Hudson again could I we get
back to public comments in a
minute of
course I believe it was Eric talking
about his dad talking about the town's
people making use of the railroad when
it went through uh there are times a
couple of girlfriends and I would get on
the train and go to lantic to go to the
movies and that
there was no train coming back later
that night so one of our folks would
have to come pick us up but also when my
dad went to high school we all went to
Windam my dad went to high school they
used to take the train to
lanic to go to high school so w just a
little bit of trivia but also to show
how the importance the train was during
that period of time to the town of an
and that it's great that the rail trail
is there now and it's just becoming so
such a significant part of the town as
well thank you
Katherine next up is meeting date and
venue the date is November
19th hey Jed it's Joanne Hebert can I
just say one quick thing oh yes Joan
thank you no no it's that I love that
fun fact of um that she just brought up
about the uh the take in the train but
no very informative meeting I just
wanted to stay through the end I always
like learning a lot um thank you so much
I mean I don't have much to add but
since I waited I thought I would just
let you know that I did learn a lot
thank you for the informative meeting
and good night I appreciate you
attending it's uh you know nice to have
some people show up to see what we're
doing now and then appreciate it thank
you Joan thank
you so the next meeting is November 19th
venue is to be determined it
uh I'll look and see if we can do a run
through the new community Senior Center
if it's not there it'll be here then my
plan going forward after that is
December through March probably will be
Zoom only for the winter months and then
uh in April maybe we'll start trying to
to meet in person again but
uh and at the next meeting I'll also go
through you proposed calendar dates for
for next year and I look through in uh
moving our meetings to Tuesday really
made it great with all the holidays we
don't have to redo any of them and and
it works out being the third Tuesday of
the month uh all year long there was no
uh no interruptions to that but I'll
I'll bring a formal listing so that we
can vote on vote on that next
month any any other comments uh before
we adjourn here
hearing none uh I thank everybody for
the sport as always uh thank Ann for
setting up you know that we could use
the room uh an and Marina got over here
6:30 so we could make sure all the
technology worked and uh we got her
going so I appreciate that uh John
thanks for the work on the pccd and the
uh
the the concert rig such that it is and
Wayne great to have you as part of the
team and uh look forward to working with
you here and uh with that I'll make a
motion to adjourn second Patrick Patrick
second all in favor say I
I we are you with us on ready to adjourn
well maybe not so I I'll call it a lean
abstaining until unless she jumps in
here before we wrap up and the motion
passes 41 with be